# readme

## Building and running the web application (the long way)

I use a build tool called Maven to build and run a lot of my Java projects, including this one.

One of the nice things about Maven is that it manages dependencies for you (we call this dependency management).

My web application has several dependencies (including Spring Boot, javax.json, and Jackson). I specify these dependencies in pom.xml, and Maven automatically downloads these dependencies, and stores them in a local repository, if they aren't already present on my system.

Maven also builds a self-contained, standalone, executable JAR file and puts it in the target folder (right now it's called jhomepage-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar).

You can build the code with the following commands:

    # First we navigate to the root directory of the project
    % cd ~/Github/jhomepage

    # Now we get a listing of the current directory, just to make sure we're in the right directory
    % ls
    pom.xml		README.md	src

    # Now we are ready to build the web application and install any necessary dependencies
    % mvn clean install
    [INFO] Scanning for projects
    .
    ..
    ...
    [INFO] BUILD SUCCESS
    
    # Now we will look for the executable JAR file in the target folder
    % ls target
    classes					jhomepage-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar		        maven-archiver
    generated-sources	    jhomepage-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar.original	    maven-status

    # Maven was able to build the project successfully, and it created an executable JAR file in the target directory
    # We will proceed with instructions on how to run the JAR file

Now we can run the JAR file. (In the next section, I'll show you a shortcut, which only involves one step, and takes less time.)

    # Let's make sure we are in the right directory
    % ls
    pom.xml		README.md	src		target

    # Now we can run the JAR file in the target folder
    % java -jar target/jhomepage-1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar
    [INFO] Scanning for projects...
    .
    ..
    ...

    # The output of this command contains a lot of info, including...
    #
    # 1. The process ID
    # 2. The port the server is listening on (in my case, 8080)
    # 3. The servlet engine (in my case, Tomcat)
    # 4. The welcome page template (index)
    # 5. The startup time (for me, almost 4 seconds) 

    # Now, let's proceed with our discussion

So I just executed the JAR file with the command shown above. Now, I can test that it's working.

When I visit localhost:8080 in my web browser, I can see my homepage. I am able to open the Home, Weather, Calendar, and Dictionary links, because they have already been implemented. The other links are waiting to be implemented.

This is the long way of building and running the web application. In the next section I will show you the short way.

## Building and running the web application (the short way)

There is actually a one-step command for building and running the web application.

Just to show that it works, and it only takes one step, we will first clean the directory of all the files that are generated by the install command.

    # First, we will navigate to the root directory of the project
    % cd ~/Github/jhomepage
    
    # Let's make sure we are in the right directory
    % ls
    pom.xml		README.md	src		target

    # Let's clean the directory
    % mvn clean
    [INFO] Scanning for projects...
    .
    ..
    ...
    [INFO] BUILD SUCCESS

    # Let's get a listing of the directory now that the clean command has been run
    % ls
    pom.xml		README.md	src

    # You can see that the target directory was removed and we are left with the source code

Okay, we are back at the beginning, with the source code and only the source code.

Now let's build and run the web application in a single step.

    % mvn spring-boot:run
    [INFO] Scanning for projects...
    .
    ..
    ...
    <program output containing the process ID, port, servlet engine, welcome page template, startup time, etc>

You can see that we are able to use the `mvn spring-boot:run` command to build and run the application in a single step.

I find this way to be preferrable, since it takes less time.

But I wanted to show you the long way, just so you can see how the `mvn spring-boot:run` command works behind the scenes.

Just like before, you can open localhost:8080 in a web browser, and see the homepage. The Home, Weather, Calendar, and Dictionary links should be working.

I'm planning to implement the other links, the other pages, in the future.

## Review

I think it helps to review, especially when the summary is concise.

We can use the `mvn clean install` and the `java -jar target/<name_of_jar_file>` commands to run the web application in two steps.

We can also use the `mvn spring-boot:run` command to run the web application in a single step.

I find the second way to be easier, faster, and preferrable.

These commands should be run from the root directory of the project, which for me is ~/Github/jhomepage.
